\section{Introduction}

\IEEEPARstart{M}{aking} processors burn less energy while at the same time
increasing performance is currently one of the greatest challenges hardware
designers are facing. Performance alone can be improved by cramming more
components onto integrated circuits \cite{moore1965cramming} utilizing new
process technologies. However, due to the end of Dennard scaling \cite{dennard},
power density on a chip will remain constant. Computer designers is forced to
employ novel techniques mitigating this issue, such as shutting down parts of
the chip \cite{esmaeilzadeh2011dark} and designing specialized hardware.

As processors grow more sophisticated, it becomes harder to reason about their
energy efficiency. Even RISC processors, which is designed with simplicity in
mind\cite{sivarama}, have seen a steep increase in complexity over the last
couple of years\cite{alf_egil_bogen_cisc_risc_blog}. Features that previously
only existed in CISC processors are now entering the RISC domain; more complex
operations are done per clock cycle. Current RISC designs may have deep
pipelines, increased component complexity, advanced branch predictor units and a
high degree of instruction level parallelism. They include features that aims to
reduce energy consumption and increase throughput in return for nondeterminism
and added complexity.  Moreover, processors are designed as more integrated
components -- interacting extensively with the rest of the system.

The need for energy efficient processors is increasing, and in order to get a
better understanding of which operations that is expensive in terms of energy,
we propose a method to measure energy efficiency on the instruction level of a
processor. Being able to model and monitor energy consumption has recently
got the industry's attention: Semiconductor companies are making software
targeting the embedded market to live monitor energy consumption on-chip, giving
application engineers the opportunity to optimize for energy.

With the emergence of performance counters, it is now possible to detect how
different pipeline stages affects the overall power consumption. Previous
research correlates power drain seen from the wall outlet with performance
counters on the CPU\cite{singh}\cite{bertran}\cite{bircher}. Others look at
energy usage under different workloads\cite{carroll2010analysis}. The SHMAC
project\cite{Umuroglu662354}\cite{rusten2012implementing} aims to build an
energy aware computer architecture, where processing cores can be tailored to
the application.

In this paper we make two contributions. First, we analyze the instruction level
energy efficiency of a modern RISC architecture. We try to isolate as many
architecture components as possible by correlating performance counters with
observed power drain for a specific instruction. Second, we show that it is
feasible to get a per-instruction energy overview of an existing architecture by
understanding the hardware and writing benchmark programs. We look at simple
single-cycle instructions as well as the most complex instructions consuming
multiple cycles on our target processor.

When each relevant instruction has been measured, we can compare their
normalized energy consumption and possibly identify patterns where consumption
is greater than expected. In the future, this can help computer designers
recognize energy bottlenecks in previous designs. Also, with energy profiles on
the instruction level, compilers can optimize their programs for energy
efficiency and not only performance. Furthermore, it will enable simulators to
estimate energy consumption of a given program and even compare it across
different cores.

The SHMAC project shows that it is possible to use the instruction energy
profiles to design hardware that is more energy efficient for a given task in
more sophisticated ways than previously possible. Energy profiles provides us a
better view of how different cores perform at different
tasks\cite{kumar2003single}. A system can then be composed of tiles with energy
profiles matching the given application.


%Our research is highly motivated by the SHMAC project from the Energy Efficient
%Computing Systems research group at NTNU. SHMAC is The Single-ISA Heterogeneous
%Many-core Computer where one of the main goals is an optimal processor in terms
%of energy efficiency. The SHMAC processor is based on the Amber open-source ARM
%compatible processor core project. Our research on the ARM Cortex A9
%based Exynos 4212 will of course not be equal to the same experiments run on
%a final implementation of SHMAC, but it will give concrete results for a near
%ISA-equivalent chip.

